>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JUNE 24:
WILL A NEW LAW SIGNED BY
PRESIDENT TRUMP IMPROVE THE
TREATMENT OF AMERICA'S VETERANS?
SOME PREDOMINANTLY WHITE,
SUBURBAN NEIGHBORHOODS ARE
CREATING THEIR OWN SCHOOL
DISTRICTS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
INSIDE THE DEBATE OVER
PRIVATELY-RUN, FOR PROFIT
PRISONS.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SENATE REPUBLICAN LEADERS ARE
WORKING TO GET VOTES TO PASS
THEIR REPLACEMENT FOR OBAMACARE,
AS FIVE OF THE 52 REPUBLICAN
SENATORS PUBLICLY OPPOSE THE
BILL IN ITS CURRENT FORM.
THE SENATE BILL, LIKE THE HOUSE
BILL THAT PASSED LAST MONTH,
PHASES OUT EXTRA FEDERAL FUNDING
GOING TO 31 STATES THAT EXPANDED
MEDICAID UNDER THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
BOTH BILLS KEEP THE OBAMACARE
RULE PREVENTING INSURANCE
COMPANIES FROM DROPPING ANYONE
WITH A PRE-EXISTING CONDITION,
BUT ALLOW STATES TO MAKE UP THE
COSTS BY DROPPING ESSENTIAL
BENEFITS.
BOTH VERSIONS REPEAL THE MANDATE
THAT EVERYONE HAVE INSURANCE.
THE ONLINE NEWS SERVICE, VOX,
REPORTED TODAY ONE POSSIBLE
CHANGE IN THE SENATE BILL:
PENALIZE PEOPLE WHO ALLOW A
LAPSE IN THEIR INSURANCE
COVERAGE BY MAKING THEM WAIT
SIX MONTHS TO BE ELIGIBLE TO BUY
A NEW POLICY.
IN HIS WEEKLY ADDRESS, PRESIDENT
TRUMP SAID THE REPUBLICAN PLAN
WILL LEAD TO LOWER INSURANCE
PREMIUMS AND MORE INSURERS
PARTICIPATING IN THE
MARKETPLACE.
>> DEMOCRATS IN CONGRESS CREATED
THIS CALAMITY, AND NOW, IF WE
DON'T ACT, MILLIONS MORE
AMERICANS WILL BE HURT BY
OBAMACARE'S DEEPENING DEATH
SPIRAL.
>> Sreenivasan: SAUDI ARABIA
SAYS IT HAS FOILED A TERRORIST
PLOT TARGETING THE HOLIEST SITE
IN ISLAM.
SAUDI SECURITY FORCES SAID TODAY
THEY THWARTED A WOULD-BE SUICIDE
BOMBER WHO INTENDED TO BLOW
HIMSELF UP LAST NIGHT AT THE
GRAND MOSQUE IN MECCA, WHERE
MILLIONS OF WORSHIPPERS HAVE
GATHERED THIS WEEKEND TO MARK
THE END OF THE HOLY MONTH OF
RAMADAN.
SAUDI OFFICIALS SAY THE
ATTACKER WAS CORNERED IN A
THREE-STORY APARTMENT BUILDING
NEAR THE MOSQUE, AND WHEN HE
REFUSED TO SURRENDER, HE BLEW
HIMSELF UP.
THE BUILDING COLLAPSED, AND
11 PEOPLE WERE INJURED.
SAUDI OFFICIALS DID NOT IDENTIFY
THE PLOTTER, THOUGH ISIS
MILITANTS HAVE CARRIED OUT
ATTACKS IN THE KINGDOM AS
RECENTLY AS LAST YEAR.
BOTH ISIS AND THE TALIBAN HAVE
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
YESTERDAY'S END OF RAMADAN CAR
BOMBING IN PAKISTAN, AT A POLICE
CHECKPOINT IN THE SOUTHWESTERN
CITY OF QUETTA.
THE ATTACK KILLED 14 PEOPLE,
INCLUDING SEVEN SOLDIERS.
PAKISTANI OFFICIALS SAID TODAY
THE DEATH TOLL FROM SEPARATE,
TWIN BOMBINGS IN A CROWDED
MARKET IN THE CITY OF PARACHINAR
HAS RISEN TO AT LEAST 67 PEOPLE,
WITH MANY OF THE WOUNDED IN
CRITICAL CONDITION.
A DIFFERENT SUNNI EXTREMIST
GROUP CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THOSE ATTACKS.
IN SOUTHWESTERN CHINA, MORE THAN
120 PEOPLE WERE MISSING UNDER
TONS OF MUD AND DEBRIS TODAY
AFTER A LANDSLIDE BURIED THEIR
VILLAGE.
RESCUERS SEARCHED FOR SURVIVORS
AFTER THE SIDE OF A MOUNTAIN IN
SICHUAN PROVINCE SUDDENLY GAVE
WAY AFTER HEAVY RAINFALL.
EARLY ON, THEY RECOVERED 15
BODIES FROM THE RUBBLE.
THIS WAS THE BIGGEST LANDSLIDE
IN THE REGION SINCE THE MASSIVE
EARTHQUAKE THERE IN 2008.
IN SYRIA, TWO SMALL STEPS TOWARD
RECONCILIATION IN THE COUNTRY'S
SIX-YEAR-OLD CIVIL WAR.
TODAY, THE GOVERNMENT OF BASHAR
AL-ASSAD FREED 672 PRISONERS
AFTER THEY AGREED TO SYRIAN
RULE.
SOME OF THE RELEASED PRISONERS
SAID THEY'D BEEN ARRESTED FOR
ANTI-GOVERNMENT ACTIONS.
SEPARATELY TODAY, A FLEDGLING
CIVIL COUNCIL, EXPECTED TO
GOVERN THE CITY OF RAQQA ONCE
ISIS IS VANQUISHED THERE,
PARDONED 83 OF THE GROUP'S
JIHADIST MILITANTS.
THE CIVIL COUNCIL, EXPECTED TO
TAKE OVER RAQQA ONCE IT FALLS TO
U.S.-BACKED REBELS, SAID IT
PARDONED THE CAPTURED
MILITANTS-- THE YOUNGEST ONLY
14-- AS A GOODWILL GESTURE.
A FRENCH TELEVISION JOURNALIST
COVERING THE FIGHT TO RETAKE THE
CITY OF MOSUL FROM ISIS HAS
DIED.
VERONIQUE ROBERT, WORKING FOR
THE FRANCE-2 CHANNEL, WAS
WOUNDED IN A MINE EXPLOSION ON
MONDAY.
SHE WAS LATER FLOWN TO A PARIS
HOSPITAL FOR TREATMENT.
THE SAME EXPLOSION KILLED
ANOTHER FRENCH JOURNALIST AND AN
IRAQI COLLEAGUE.
ROBERT WAS 54 YEARS OLD.
SHE'S THE 29th JOURNALIST KILLED
IN IRAQ SINCE 2014, ACCORDING TO
REPORTERS WITHOUT BORDERS.
>> Sreenivasan: MILITARY
VETERANS GROUPS ARE APPLAUDING
THE BIPARTISAN-BACKED LAW
PRESIDENT TRUMP SIGNED YESTERDAY
TO IMPROVE THE VETERANS
ADMINISTRATION.
IT CREATES A NEW V.A.
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE AND MAKES
IT EASIER FOR THE V.A. TO FIRE
PROBLEMATIC EMPLOYEES IN A
DEPARTMENT WHOSE HOSPITALS HAVE
BEEN CRITICIZED FOR LAPSES IN
CARE FOR AMERICA'S 19 MILLION
VETERANS.
ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORTER
DARLENE SUPERVILLE HAS BEEN
COVERING THIS STORY AND JOINS ME
NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
THIS IS KIND OF A RARE GLIMMER
OF BIPARTISANSHIP.
>> IT IS A RARE GLIMMER OF
BIPARTISANSHIP.
AND BIPARTISANSHIP IS EASY TO
ACHIEVE WHEN YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT MILITARY VETERANS AND THE
PEOPLE IN THIS COUNTRY WHO
VOLUNTARILY GO INTO HARM'S WAY
IN DEFENSE OF THE UNITED STATES.
REMEMBER-- YOU MAY REMEMBER THAT
THE V.A. SECRETARY, DAVID
SCHULKEN, WHO IS A HOLDOVER FROM
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION, WHEN
HE WENT BEFORE THE SENATE TO BE
CONFIRMED TO BECOME THE VETERAN
AFFAIRS SECRETARY, THE
CONFIRMATION VOTE WAS 100-0, AND
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT DONALD
TRUMP TALKS ABOUT QUITE A BIT
WHEN HE'S TALKING ABOUT
VETERANS' ISSUES.
>> Sreenivasan: I REMEMBER THE
SCANDAL THAT STARTED THIS.
I MEAN, THIS WAS IN PHOENIX.
THIS WAS A FEW YEARS AGO, IT
EVEN CAUSED ERIC SHINSEKI HIS
JOB.
REFRESH US A LITTLE BIT ON WHAT
CAUSED THIS.
>> WELL, IT WAS UNCOVERED THAT
AT THE V.A. MEDICAL CENTER IN
PHOENIX, STAFF THERE WERE
KEEPING SEPARATE WAITING LISTS
OF VETERANS THAT WERE WAITING
FOR APPOINTMENTS.
THEY WERE TRYING TO COVER UP THE
LONG WAITS THAT WERE-- THAT IT
WAS TAKING FOR VETERANS TO GET
THEIR APPOINTMENTS WITH THEIR
DOCTORS.
DATA WAS BEING FALSIFIED, AND
THROUGHOUT A LOT OF THIS, IT WAS
FOUND THAT SOME VETERANS
ACTUALLY DIED WHILE THEY WERE
WAITING FOR CARE.
IT COST ERIC SHINSEKI HIS JOB AS
THE V.A. SECRETARY, AS YOU
MENTIONED, AND CAUSED CONGRESS
TO START THINKING ABOUT WAYS TO
TRANSFORM THE V.A. AND TO HELP
GET VETERANS THE CARE THAT THEY
NEED AND TO GET IT FASTER.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS LAW
ALSO OFFERS SOME PROTECTIONS FOR
WHISTLE BLOWERS?
BECAUSE IT'S OFTEN THE WAY THAT
WE EVEN HEAR ABOUT THESE THINGS,
THESE PROBLEMS IN THE V.A., ARE
EITHER FROM VETERANS WHO ARE THE
VICTIMS OF POOR CARE OR LACK OF
CARE, OR PEOPLE INSIDE WHO WANT
TO SEE SOMETHING CHANGE.
>> RIGHT, IT DOES OFFER SOME NEW
PROTECTIONS FOR WHISTLEBLOWERS.
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS ALSO CREATING
A COMPLAINT HOT LINE AT THE
WHITE HOUSE, WHICH IS UNDERGOING
SOME TESTING RIGHT NOW, FOR
VETERANS AND OTHERS TO CALL IN
WITH COMPLAINTS AND THAT KIND OF
THING.
SO, HE'S PUTTING A LITTLE BIT OF
A PREMIUM ON PROTECTING
WHISTLEBLOWERS AND THE KIND OF
PEOPLE WHO BRING THESE
SITUATIONS TO LIGHT.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, HOW
LONG DID SOME OF THESE EMPLOYEES
HAVE THIS SORT OF PROTECTION,
AND WHO WAS OPPOSED TO THIS KIND
OF LEGISLATION?
I MEAN, IS IT THE... IS IT THE
KIND OF UNIONS THAT ARE... THESE
EMPLOYEES ARE MEMBERS OF, OR
KIND OF CAREER SERVICE
INDIVIDUALS?
>> MOSTLY, IT'S BEEN THE
EMPLOYEE UNIONS, THE UNIONS THAT
REPRESENT THE CAREER WORKERS IN
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT,
SOME OF WHOM ARE AFRAID THAT
SOME OF THE CHANGES UNDER THIS
LAW WOULD DO TWO THINGS: ONE,
WOULD ALLOW THE V.A. SECRETARY
AND OTHER TOP OFFICIALS IN THAT
DEPARTMENT TO SORT OF TARGET
EMPLOYEES FOR POLITICAL
PURPOSES RATHER THAN ACTUAL JOB
PERFORMANCE ISSUES, WHICH IS
WHAT THIS IS SUPPOSED TO BE
ABOUT.
AND THE OTHER ISSUE THAT
CONCERNS A LOT OF THE UNIONS IS
THE FACT THAT THEY SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING OR WHAT IS ABOUT TO
HAPPEN AT THE V.A. AS PART OF A
BROADER PUSH ACROSS THE
GOVERNMENT TO CHANGE CIVIL
SERVICE RULES, MAKE IT EASIER TO
GET RID OF EMPLOYEES.
AS YOU MAY KNOW, DONALD TRUMP,
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP, WANTS TO
SHRINK THE SIZE OF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, AND A LOT OF
AGENCIES ARE CURRENTLY LOOKING
FOR WAYS TO DO THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DARLENE SUPERVILLE OF THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE HE LEFT
OFFICE, PRESIDENT OBAMA ENDED
THE PRACTICE OF INCARCERATING
PEOPLE CONVICTED OF FEDERAL
CRIMES IN PRIVATELY-RUN FOR-
PROFIT PRISONS.
EARLIER THIS YEAR, THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION REVERSED THAT.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION SAID
THE DECISION WAS BASED ON
DECLINING PRISON POPULATIONS AND
SAFETY CONCERNS.
BUT AS THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION
INTENSIFIED ITS CRACKDOWN ON
ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION AND PUSHED
TO PRESERVE STIFF SENTENCING
PRACTICES LIKE MANDATORY
MINIMUMS, ATTORNEY GENERAL JEFF
SESSIONS SAID THE GOVERNMENT
NEEDS THE FLEXIBILITY AND
RESOURCES PROVIDED BY PRIVATE
PRISON COMPANIES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO TAKES A CLOSER LOOK AT
THE DEBATE.
>> Reporter: TUCKED BETWEEN OIL
FIELDS IN CENTRAL CALIFORNIA'S
KERN VALLEY IS THE TAFT
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION.
CRAIG APKER HAS BEEN THE WARDEN
FOR THE PAST THREE YEARS.
>> I SIMPLY WANT TO RUN AND BE
PART OF THE BEST PRISON EVER.
>> Reporter: TAFT IS A LOW-
SECURITY PRISON THAT HAS DORM-
STYLE HOUSING, A MEDICAL UNIT,
AND OFFERS PRISONERS HIGH SCHOOL
EQUIVALENCY CLASSES AND WORK-
TRAINING PROGRAMS.
WARDEN APKER ASKED US NOT TO
RECORD VIDEO FOR SECURITY
REASONS, BUT HE ALLOWED US TO
TAKE THESE PHOTOS-- LATER
REVIEWED AND CLEARED BY A PRISON
OFFICIAL.
>> IT REALLY COMES DOWN TO HOW
WE OPERATE OUR INSTITUTIONS.
DO WE HAVE MEANINGFUL PROGRAMS?
DO WE HAVE A RESPECTFUL
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE INMATES?
>> Reporter: ON THE SURFACE,
TAFT LOOKS A LOT LIKE THE MORE
THAN 100 FACILITIES OVERSEEN BY
THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS.
BUT THIS ONE IS OPERATED BY A
PRIVATE, FOR-PROFIT COMPANY:
MANAGEMENT AND TRAINING
CORPORATION, OR M.T.C.
AS WITH ALL PRIVATELY-RUN
FEDERAL PRISONS, TAFT HAS TWO
BUREAU OF PRISON MONITORS ON
SITE TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH
FEDERAL GUIDELINES.
BEFORE STARTING HIS JOB WITH
M.T.C., APKER WORKED 28 YEARS
FOR THE B.O.P., INCLUDING TEN AS
A WARDEN.
>> I DIDN'T JUST CHANGE HOW I
VIEW MY RESPONSIBILITIES, MY
BELIEF IN WHAT WE DO HERE,
BECAUSE I'M IN THE PRIVATE
SECTOR.
I BROUGHT WITH ME THE SAME NEED
TO TRY... TRY TO ACHIEVE
EXCELLENCE.
>> Reporter: TAFT IS ONE OF THE
11 LOW-SECURITY FEDERAL PRISONS
RUN BY M.T.C. OR TWO LARGER
PRIVATE PRISON COMPANIES,
CORECIVIC AND THE GEO GROUP.
SAVING MONEY WAS ONE REASON THE
GOVERNMENT INITIALLY TURNED TO
PRIVATE PRISONS.
THE BUREAU OF PRISONS SAYS THEY
COST ON AVERAGE $17 A DAY LESS
PER PRISONER TO OPERATE,
SUGGESTING THOSE 11 FACILITIES
SAVE TAXPAYERS $144 MILLION A
YEAR.
A 2016 STUDY BY THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION FOUND THOSE SAVINGS
ARE ACHIEVED PRIMARILY BY HIRING
FEWER CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS AND
PAYING THEM LESS.
ANOTHER REASON FOR TURNING TO
PRIVATE PRISONS WAS
OVERCROWDING.
BETWEEN 1980 AND 2013, WITH THE
ADVENT OF HARSHER SENTENCING
LAWS LIKE MANDATORY MINIMUMS FOR
DRUG CRIMES, THE FEDERAL PRISON
POPULATION INCREASED EIGHT-FOLD.
A BIG PART OF THAT INCREASE WAS
A MASSIVE SPIKE IN PROSECUTIONS
OF IMMIGRANTS ACCUSED OF COMING
BACK TO THE U.S. AFTER
DEPORTATION, OR "ILLEGAL
REENTRY."
THE B.O.P. RELIES ON THOSE 11
PRIVATE PRISONS, LIKE TAFT, TO
HOUSE NON-CITIZEN OFFENDERS.
AT TWO OF THOSE PRISONS, IN
TEXAS AND IN MISSISSIPPI, THERE
WERE RIOTS IN 2009 AND 2012
FOLLOWING THE DEATHS OF SEVERAL
INMATES IN CUSTODY.
THE INCIDENTS SPARKED
INVESTIGATIONS BY THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT'S INSPECTOR GENERAL,
MICHAEL HOROWITZ.
>> IN ONE OF THOSE RIOTS, A... A
CORRECTIONAL OFFICER WAS KILLED.
MANY OTHER INMATES AND
CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS WERE
INJURED.
SEVERAL OF THESE RIOTS HAD
FOLLOWED COMPLAINTS BY INMATES
ABOUT STAFFING, CORRECTIONAL
STAFFING, HEALTHCARE STAFFING;
CONCERNS ABOUT THE PROVISION OF
FOOD AND OTHER SERVICES.
THE B.O.P. HAD NOT HELD THE
PRISONS ACCOUNTABLE AND MADE
SURE THAT THEY HAD IN FACT TAKEN
THE ACTIONS THAT THEY NEEDED TO
TAKE.
>> Reporter: THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL'S FINDINGS AFTER THE
RIOTS LED TO A BROADER FOUR-
YEAR INVESTIGATION THAT COMPARED
FEDERAL PRIVATELY-RUN PRISONS
TO SIMILAR GOVERNMENT-RUN
FACILITIES.
THE REPORT REVEALED THAT, PER
CAPITA, PRIVATELY-RUN FACILITIES
HAD MORE CONTRABAND SMUGGLED IN;
MORE LOCKDOWNS AND USES OF FORCE
BY CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS; MORE
ASSAULTS BOTH BY INMATES ON
OTHER INMATES AND BY INMATES ON
CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS; MORE
COMPLAINTS ABOUT MEDICAL CARE,
STAFF, FOOD, AND CONDITIONS OF
CONFINEMENT; AND TWO FACILITIES
WERE HOUSING INMATES IN SOLITARY
CONFINEMENT TO FREE UP BED
SPACE.
THE FINDINGS ALSO HIGHLIGHTED
CHRONIC UNDERSTAFFING AS THE
ROOT OF MANY PROBLEMS.
>> IT GOES RIGHT TO THE CORE OF
MAKING SURE THAT THERE ARE
ENOUGH CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS TO
WATCH OVER THE INMATES; TO MAKE
SURE THAT... THAT ALL INMATES
ARE MAINTAINED IN A SECURE AND
SAFE ENVIRONMENT; AND THAT
CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS, VERY
CRITICALLY, ARE SAFE FROM THE
INMATES.
>> Reporter: HOROWITZ ALSO
FAULTED THE B.O.P. ITSELF FOR
FAILING TO HOLD THE COMPANIES
ACCOUNTABLE TO THEIR CONTRACT
REQUIREMENTS, CONTRACTS WORTH
MORE THAN $500 MILLION EACH
YEAR.
SO, HOW ARE THESE THINGS FALLING
THROUGH THE CRACKS?
>> BECAUSE THERE ISN'T EFFECTIVE
OVERSIGHT GOING ON.
THE RESPONSIBILITY PRIMARILY
FALLS ON THE B.O.P. WITH
CONNECTION WITH THEIR CONTRACTS,
AND THESE ARE SUBSTANTIAL
CONTRACTS.
>> Reporter: THE BUREAU OF
PRISONS AGREED TO IMPLEMENT HIS
RECOMMENDED REFORMS, BUT THE
COMPANIES DISPUTED THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL'S FINDINGS, TELLING
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND WHAT THEY TOLD
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT-- THAT
THE INVESTIGATION DIDN'T ACCOUNT
FOR HOW THEIR LARGELY NON-
CITIZEN INMATE POPULATIONS ARE
MORE DIFFICULT TO MANAGE.
ONE POSITIVE NOTE FOR PRIVATE
PRISONS: THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
DID FIND THEIR INMATES PASSED
MORE DRUG TESTS AND FACED FEWER
ACCUSATIONS OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
THAN INMATES IN GOVERNMENT-RUN
INSTITUTIONS.
LAST AUGUST, PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DECIDED ALL
B.O.P. CONTRACTS WITH PRIVATE
COMPANIES WOULD BE PHASED OUT.
>> I WAS DISAPPOINTED.
I... I THINK THE CRITICS TEND TO
VIEW A PRIVATE CORRECTIONS
COMPANY AS BEING BOTTOM LINE-
DRIVEN TO THE EXTENT THAT
SHORTCUTS, IN AN EFFORT TO SAVE
MONEY, LOWER QUALITY.
BUT I HAVE NEVER BEEN ASKED TO
TAKE A SHORTCUT TO ADDRESS ANY
BOTTOM-LINE CONCERNS HERE AT
TAFT.
NEVER.
>> I KNOW THAT YOU WANT SAFE
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE THE STREETS
BELONG TO FAMILIES AND
COMMUNITIES.
>> Reporter: THIS YEAR, THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION REVERSED
THE DECISION TO PHASE OUT THE
BUREAU OF PRISONS' PRIVATE
CONTRACTS.
STOCK PRICES FOR CORECIVIC AND
THE GEO GROUP, WHICH HAD
PLUMMETED AFTER THE OBAMA
DIRECTIVE, HAVE SOARED SINCE
ELECTION DAY.
>> FOR THE PRIVATE PRISON
INDUSTRY, THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION IS AN ENORMOUS
GIFT.
>> Reporter: CARL TAKEI HEADS
THE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION'S PRISON PROJECT.
>> ALL OF THE EXPANSION OF
IMMIGRATION DETENTION, THE
REVIVAL OF THE WAR ON DRUGS, THE
INCREASED CRIMINAL PROSECUTION
OF IMMIGRANTS, AND THE LONGER
SENTENCES FOR IMMIGRATION
PROSECUTIONS, ALL ADD UP TO AN
ENORMOUS BOONDOGGLE FOR THE
PRIVATE PRISON INDUSTRY.
>> Reporter: IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT ALREADY
HOUSES MORE THAN 70% OF ITS
DETAINEES IN PRIVATELY-RUN
FACILITIES, AND PRESIDENT TRUMP
SUPPORTS A NEW MANDATORY MINIMUM
SENTENCE OF FIVE YEARS FOR
ILLEGAL REENTRY.
TAKEI IS CONCERNED THE COMPANIES
HAVE A PROFIT INCENTIVE TO KEEP
PRISONERS IN THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM LONGER.
>> YOU COULD END UP IN A
CIRCUMSTANCE WHERE YOU GET
ARRESTED, HELD IN A GEO GROUP
JAIL, SERVE YOUR SENTENCE IN A
GEO GROUP PRISON, GET RELEASED
TO A GEO GROUP HALFWAY HOUSE,
AND THEN END UP SUPERVISED ON A
GEO GROUP G.P.S. MONITOR.
AND THIS IS EXTRAORDINARILY
DANGEROUS BECAUSE IT ALLOWS THE
PRIVATE PRISON COMPANIES TO
MANIPULATE THE DEMAND FOR THEIR
OWN PRODUCTS.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF PRISONS INCARCERATES
ABOUT 20,000 INDIVIDUALS IN
PRIVATE FACILITIES, STATE AND
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS HOUSE MORE
THAN FOUR TIMES THAT AMOUNT,
WITH OVER 90,000 PEOPLE IN
PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS.
TEXAS IS AMONG THE TOP STATES
USING PRIVATE PRISONS.
THE INDUSTRY'S CONTRACTS HERE IN
THE STATE ARE WORTH HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS EVERY YEAR.
TEXAS, WHICH HAS THE NATION'S
LARGEST PRISON POPULATION, BEGAN
USING PRIVATE PRISONS IN THE
1980s AND HOUSES THE HIGHEST
NUMBER OF STATE INMATES INSIDE
THEM.
HAVE YOU BEEN SATISFIED WITH
WHAT YOU'VE SEEN?
>> SO FAR, EVERYTHING'S BEEN
WORKING GOOD.
>> Reporter: SINCE JANUARY,
SHERIFF MARK JOHNSON HAS
OVERSEEN THE 96-BED FANNIN
COUNTY JAIL IN BONHAM, TEXAS.
HE SAYS HIRING THE GEO GROUP TO
RUN THE JAIL IS SAVING THE
COUNTY MONEY.
>> IT IS EXPENSIVE TO OPERATE
ONE OF THESE THINGS.
IS THERE MONEY TO BE MADE IN IT?
YEAH.
>> Reporter: THE MONEY THE
COMPANIES MAKE OFTEN INCLUDES
REIMBURSEMENTS FROM LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS FOR JAIL AND PRISON
BEDS THAT GO UNUSED, FALLING
SHORT OF OCCUPANCY QUOTAS IN THE
CONTRACTS.
WOULD YOU RECOMMEND GEO TO A
NEIGHBORING COUNTY THAT WAS
LOOKING TO DEAL WITH
OVERCROWDING?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK IT WOULD BE A... A
BENEFIT TO THEM.
I HAVEN'T SEEN ANYBODY HERE THAT
I WOULDN'T BE HAPPY TO HAVE ON
MY TEAM WORKING FOR ME.
YES, IT WOULD BE A HUGE CONCERN
TO THINK THAT THEY WEREN'T DOING
WHAT THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO BE
DOING AND THAT THE PRISONERS
WEREN'T BEING TREATED RIGHT,
BEING GIVEN THEIR BASIC NEEDS,
THEIR EVERYDAY NEEDS THAT ARE
REQUIRED BY LAW.
>> Reporter: A 2008 REPORT BY
THE TEXAS LEGISLATURE FOUND THAT
STAFF AT PRIVATE PRISONS WERE
GENERALLY PAID LESS THAN THEIR
STATE COUNTERPARTS AND HAD MUCH
HIGHER TURNOVER RATES.
SINCE 2011, WITH A DECLINING
PRISONER POPULATION, THE STATE
HAS CLOSED THREE PRIVATE
PRISONS, AND, TO SAVE MONEY, THE
LEGISLATURE HAS PROPOSED CLOSING
THREE MORE.
>> SHERIFF.
>> Reporter: SHERIFF JOHNSON
SAYS WHETHER HIS JAIL IS RUN BY
THE COUNTY OR A PRIVATE COMPANY,
ULTIMATELY, HE'S THE ONE
RESPONSIBLE FOR OVERSIGHT.
>> UNDER LAW, THERE'S NO GETTING
OUT OF IT.
IT SAYS THE SHERIFF IS THE
CONSERVATOR OF THE PEOPLE AND
SHALL MAINTAIN AND OPERATE A
JAIL AND TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THOSE INMATES, AND THAT... THAT
IS OUR RESPONSIBILITY.
BUT WHEN SOMETHING BAD HAPPENS
TO ONE OF THEM, THE LAWSUIT IS
GOING TO HAVE MY NAME RIGHT AT
THE TOP OF IT.
>> Sreenivasan: CURRENTLY, 30
STATES HAVE LAWS THAT ALLOW
GEOGRAPHIC COMMUNITIES TO BREAK
AWAY FROM LARGE PUBLIC SCHOOL
DISTRICTS AND FORM THEIR OWN.
AS A RESULT, A GROWING NUMBER OF
PREDOMINANTLY WHITE,
MIDDLE-CLASS NEIGHBORHOODS ARE
DOING JUST THAT AND TAKING THEIR
LOCAL PROPERTY TAXES WITH THEM.
THAT MAKES RACIAL AND ECONOMIC
DISPARITIES IN ADJACENT SCHOOL
DISTRICTS EVEN WORSE.
ALMOST 50 COMMUNITIES HAVE
SECEDED SINCE THE YEAR 2000,
ACCORDING TO THE NONPROFIT ED
BILL, AND A STORY THIS WEEK IN
"U.S. NEWS AND WORLD REPORT."
U.S. NEWS EDUCATION REPORTER
LAUREN CAMERA WROTE THAT STORY,
JOINS ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON.
LAUREN, LET'S JUST BREAK DOWN
HOW SECESSION OF A SCHOOL
DISTRICT WORKS.
YOU TOOK A LOOK AT A STORY IN
ALABAMA.
>> THIS RECENTLY CAME TO LIGHT
WHEN A SCHOOL DISTRICT IN
ALABAMA, JEFFERSON COUNTY SCHOOL
DISTRICT, WHICH INCLUDES
BIRMINGHAM, A COMMUNITY THERE
WHICH IS MAJORITY WHITE AND
MIDDLE-CLASS.
IT'S CALLED GARDENDALE, AND, FOR
A WHILE, THEY HAVE BEEN WANTING
TO SPLINTER OFF UNDER THE GUISE
OF CONTROLLING MORE OF THEIR
LOCAL PROPERTY TAXES, WHICH, OF
COURSE, MAKE UP THE BULK OF ANY
SCHOOL'S BUDGET.
AND AS YOU MENTIONED IN YOUR
INTRODUCTION, HARI, THIS IS
ACTUALLY LEGAL IN 30 STATES.
THERE ARE POLICIES ON THE BOOKS
ALLOWING COMMUNITIES TO DO THIS
IF THEY SO WISH.
AND, ACTUALLY, YOU KNOW, IT'S
NOT JUST IN ALABAMA.
WE'RE SEEING THIS HAPPEN ACROSS
THE ENTIRE COUNTRY.
SINCE 2000, MORE THAN 70
COMMUNITIES HAVE TRIED TO DO
THIS.
47 HAVE SUCCEEDED.
>> Sreenivasan: I'M ASSUMING
THAT THE RATIONALE BEHIND IT IS,
"HEY, WE WANT TO KEEP OUR
SCHOOLS GREAT.
WE ARE POURING ALL OF OUR
PROPERTY TAX INTO IT.
WE WANT TO KEEP THIS AROUND
WHERE OUR KIDS ARE ACTUALLY
GOING TO BENEFIT FROM IT."
BUT THERE'S A FLIP SIDE TO THAT.
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
WHEN A COMMUNITY THAT IS
WEALTHIER OR HAS HIGHER PROPERTY
TAX RATES, WHEN THEY SPLINTER
OFF FROM THEIR LARGER SCHOOL
DISTRICT, THAT CREATES THIS
FINANCIAL HOLE IN THE SCHOOL
DISTRICT THAT THEY LEAVE BEHIND.
YOU KNOW, IN EDUCATION POLICY,
WE TALK A LOT ABOUT SUBGROUP
PERFORMANCE AND ACHIEVEMENT
GAPS, AND A LOT OF TIMES THAT
FOCUSES ON THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN STUDENTS OF COLOR AND
WHITE STUDENTS, FOR EXAMPLE.
BUT REALLY THE FASTEST GROWING
GAP IS BETWEEN SOCIOECONOMIC
INDICATORS.
SO, POOR STUDENTS AND THEIR
WEALTHIER PEERS, THAT IS THE
FASTEST GROWING GAP IN THE U.S.
TODAY.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU POINT OUT
THAT THERE'S NINE ACTIVE
SECESSION EFFORTS THAT ARE
HAPPENING.
I'M JUST GOING TO RATTLE OFF
THIS LIST ACROSS THE U.S.:
ALABAMA, CALIFORNIA, GEORGIA,
LOUISIANA, NORTH CAROLINA,
TENNESSEE, VERMONT, AND
WISCONSIN.
SO, DO THESE STATES, OF THE 30
THAT ALLOW FOR THIS, HAVE TO
STUDY ANY SORT OF POTENTIAL
IMPACT, WHAT HAPPENS WHEN A
SECESSION OCCURS TO THOSE
SURROUNDING SCHOOL DISTRICTS?
>> ONLY A HANDFUL ACTUALLY
REQUIRE THAT THE DISTRICT LOOK
INTO THE IMPACT OF THE... THE
RACIAL IMPACT, THE SOCIOECONOMIC
IMPACT AND THE FINANCIAL IMPACT
OF THE COMMUNITIES SPLINTERING
OFF.
IN TENNESSEE, FOR EXAMPLE, THE
ONLY THING THAT THEY REQUIRE FOR
A COMMUNITY TO SPLINTER OFF IS
THAT THE MUNICIPALITY MUST HAVE
MORE THAN 1,500 STUDENTS.
AND, ALSO, THE MAJORITY OF THE
RESIDENTS IN THE MUNICIPALITY
THAT WANTS TO SPLINTER OFF, THEY
MUST AGREE WITH THAT MOVE.
SO, THAT MEANS THEY'RE NOT
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT ANYONE, ANY
OF THE RESIDENTS WHO LIVE IN THE
LARGER SCHOOL DISTRICT THAT
THEY'RE SPLINTERING OFF FROM.
>> Sreenivasan: LAUREN CAMERA,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE A JUNE 14
HIGH-RISE FIRE KILLED 79 PEOPLE
IN LONDON, BRITISH AUTHORITIES
HAVE INSPECTED MORE THAN 600
SIMILAR APARTMENT BUILDINGS
ACROSS ENGLAND.
SO FAR, 34 APARTMENT TOWERS HAVE
FAILED FIRE SAFETY TESTS.
AND LAST NIGHT, 4,000 RESIDENTS
IN ONE LONDON COMMUNITY WERE
ABRUPTLY ORDERED TO EVACUATE.
ITN'S MIKE GRIFFITHS HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: GATHERING WHAT
THEY COULD, THEY MADE THEIR WAY
INTO THE NIGHT-- THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE FROM THE CHALCOT ESTATE
FACING WEEKS OF UNCERTAINTY.
FIRE EXPERTS SAY THE CLADDING
OUTSIDE IS POSSIBLY UNSAFE.
INSIDE, POOR INSULATION ON GAS
PIPES, MISSING FIRE DOORS, ALONG
WITH OTHER DEFECTS.
SOME RESIDENTS, LIKE SHIRLEY
PHILLIPS, SPENT THE NIGHT IN A
NEARBY LEISURE CENTER.
>> I THINK WE'RE ALL RUNNING ON
ADRENALINE, AND WE'RE GETTING
STRESSED OUT AT THE MOMENT
BECAUSE WE'RE NOT BEING KEPT
INFORMED WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN,
WHERE WE'RE GOING.
>> THEY SAID THE BUILDING IS
GOING TO BE INVESTIGATED UNTIL
TWO TO FOUR WEEKS FROM NOW.
SO, THEY SAID THAT THEY'LL TRY
THEIR BEST TO PROVIDE US
TEMPORARY ACCOMMODATION.
>> IT'S DISGUSTING!
ABSOLUTELY AWFUL!
ALL THESE KIDS ARE HOMELESS!
>> Reporter: THE PRIME
MINISTER SAYS THE U.K.
GOVERNMENT WILL SUPPORT COUNCILS
BUT STOPPED SHORT OF SAYING ALL
COSTS WILL BE COVERED.
>> THE GOVERNMENT IS WORKING
WITH THOSE LOCAL AUTHORITIES
AFFECTED BY THIS ISSUE TO ENSURE
THAT THEY'RE ABLE TO DO WHAT IS
NECESSARY ON THE GROUND TO
REASSURE PEOPLE ABOUT THE SAFETY
OF THEIR BLOCKS, IF IT IS
NECESSARY TO EVACUATE PEOPLE AND
TAKE ACTION TO MAKE THOSE...
THOSE TOWER BLOCKS SAFE.
AND THE GOVERNMENT IS SUPPORTING
LOCAL AUTHORITIES TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: CAMPAIGNERS SAY
THE DEFECTS ARE PROOF THAT
CURRENT REGULATIONS NEED TO
CHANGE.
>> WE DO NOT HAVE THE CHECKS AND
BALANCES REQUIRED FOR WHAT IS
ESSENTIALLY COMPLEX BUILDING
WORKS IN MODERN DAY.
>> Reporter: THAT DEBATE WILL
CONTINUE.
THE RESIDENTS HAVE ALREADY SPENT
ONE NIGHT AWAY FROM HOME.
THEY FACE MANY MORE BEFORE THEY
CAN RETURN.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, CYBER
SECURITY OFFICIALS IN BRITAIN
ARE INVESTIGATING WHAT THEY CALL
"A SUSTAINED AND DETERMINED"
CYBER ATTACK ON PARLIAMENT.
THEY SAY HACKERS TRIED-- AND
FAILED-- TO IDENTIFY WEAK EMAIL
PASSWORDS USED BY HOUSE OF
COMMONS MEMBERS.
AND HERE AT HOME, ONE-OF-A-KIND
CRIME MEMORABILIA WAS AUCTIONED
OFF TODAY IN BOSTON.
ON THE BLOCK WERE SUCH ITEMS AS
AL CAPONE'S SPARKLING POCKET
WATCH, FEATURING THE MOBSTER'S
INITIALS SPELLED OUT BY 23
DIAMONDS.
AND BELONGING TO BONNIE PARKER,
OF THE BONNIE AND CLYDE BARROW
BANK-ROBBING TEAM, A JEWEL-
STUDDED PROMISE RING WITH A
THREE-HEADED SNAKE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.